Add Rust client tutorial (#236)
edgedb/edgedb-rust: edgedb-tokio/src/tutorial.md

```rust
use edgedb_protocol::model::BigInt;

let query = "select <bigint>$0";
let bigint_arg = BigInt::from(20);
let query_res: Result<Value, _> = client.query_required_single(query, &(bigint_arg,)).await;
assert_eq!(
    format!("{query_res:?}"),
    "Ok(BigInt(BigInt { negative: false, weight: 0, digits: [20] }))"
);
```

## Casting inside the EdgeDB compiler

EdgeDB requires arguments to have a cast in the same way that Rust requires a type declaration in function signatures. As such, arguments in queries are used as type specification for the EdgeDB compiler, not to cast from queries from the Rust side. Take this query as an example:

```rust
let query = "select <int32>$0";
```

This simply means "select an argument that must be an `int32`", not "take the received argument and cast it into an `int32`".

As such, this will return an error:

```rust
let query = "select <int32>$0";
let argument = 9i16; // Rust client will expect an int16
let query_res: Result<Value, _> = client.query_required_single(query, &(argument,)).await;
assert!(query_res
    .unwrap_err()
    .to_string()
    .contains("expected std::int16"));
```

## Using JSON

> EdgeDB can cast any type to JSON with `<json>`, but the `_json` methods don't require this cast in the query. This result can be turned into a String and used to respond to some JSON API request directly, unpacked into a struct using `serde` and `serde_json`, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EdgeDB can cast any type to JSON with `<json>`, but the `_json` methods don't require this cast in the query. This result can be turned into a `String` and used to respond to some JSON API request directly, unpacked into a struct using `serde` and `serde_json`, etc.
```

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Deserialize)]
pub struct Account {
    pub username: String,
    pub id: Uuid,
}

// No need for <json> cast here
let query = "select Account { 
      username,
      id
    } filter .username = <str>$0;";

// Assuming we know there will only be one result we can use query_single_json;
// otherwise query_json which returns a map of json
let json_res = client
    .query_single_json(query, &("SomeUserName",))
    .await?
    .unwrap();

// Format: {"username" : "SomeUser1", "id" : "7093944a-fd3a-11ed-a013-c7de12ffe7a9"}
let as_string = json_res.to_string();
let as_account: Account = serde_json::from_str(&json_res)?;
```

## Execute

> The `execute` method was added in June 2023 and will show up inside the next version of the `edgedb-tokio` crate. In the meantime it can be used by setting your edgedb dependencies to the git repo:

Reviewer: > …inside the next version of the`edgedb-tokio` crate

"Inside" instead of "in" because it's a "crate?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `execute` method was added in June 2023 and will show up inside the next version of the `edgedb-tokio` crate. In the meantime it can be used by setting your EdgeDB dependencies to the git repo:
```

```
edgedb-derive = { git = "https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-rust" }
edgedb-tokio = { git = "https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-rust" }
edgedb-protocol = { git = "https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-rust" }
```

> `execute` doesn't return anything (a successful execute returns an `Ok(())`) which is convenient for things like updates or commands where we don't care about getting an output if it works:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`execute` doesn't return anything (a successful execute returns an `Ok(())`) which is convenient for things like updates or commands where we don't care about getting output if it works:
```

```rust
client.execute("update Account set {username := .username ++ '!'};", &()).await?;
client.execute("create superuser role project;", &()).await?;
client.execute("alter role project set password := 'STRONGpassword';", &()).await?;

// Returns Ok(()) upon success but error info will be returned of course
let command = client.execute("create type MyType {};", &()).await;
assert!(command.unwrap_err().to_string().contains("bare DDL statements are not allowed"));
```

## Transactions

> The client also has a `.transaction()` method that allows atomic [transactions](https://www.edgedb.com/docs/edgeql/transactions). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The client also has a `.transaction()` method that allows for atomic [transactions](https://www.edgedb.com/docs/edgeql/transactions). 
```

> Note: What often may seem to require an atomic transaction can instead be achieved with links and [backlinks](https://www.edgedb.com/docs/edgeql/paths#backlinks) which are both idiomatic and easy to use in EdgeDB. For example, if one object holds a `required link` to two other objects and each of these two objects has a single banklink to the first one, simply inserting the first object will effectively change the state of the other two instantaneously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: What often may seem to require an atomic transaction can instead be achieved with links and [backlinks](https://www.edgedb.com/docs/edgeql/paths#backlinks) which are both idiomatic and easy to use in EdgeDB. For example, if one object holds a `required link` to two other objects and each of these two objects has a single backlink to the first one, simply inserting the first object will effectively change the state of the other two instantaneously.
```

In addition to that suggestion, I have trouble following this.

> …simply inserting the first object will effectively change the state of the other two instantaneously.

If two objects have a link to an object, that would dictate that the object has already been inserted, so inserting it would just fail. Should this be "updating" instead of "inserting?"

> Wikipedia has a good example of a transaction which will serve for the next example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wikipedia has a good example of a scenario requiring a transaction which we can then implement:
```

    │ Project directory   │ \\?\C:\rust\my_db               │
    │ Project config      │ \\?\C:\rust\my_db\edgedb.toml   │
    │ Schema dir (empty)  │ \\?\C:\rust\my_db\dbschema      │
    │ Installation method │ WSL                             │
    │ Version             │ 2.15+75c3494                    │
    │ Instance name       │ my_db                           │
    └─────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────────┘
    Version 2.15+75c3494 is already installed
    Initializing EdgeDB instance...
    Applying migrations...
    Everything is up to date. Revision initial
    Project initialized.
    To connect to my_db, run `edgedb`

Inside your cargo project you'll notice some new items:

* `edgedb.toml`, which is used to mark the directory as an EdgeDB project. The file itself doesn't contain much — just the version of EdgeDB being used — but is used by the CLI to run commands without connection flags. (E.g., `edgedb -I my_project migrate` becomes simply `edgedb migrate`). See more on edgedb.toml [in the blog post introducing the EdgeDB projects CLI](https://www.edgedb.com/blog/introducing-edgedb-projects).

* A `/dbschema` folder containing:

>     * a `default.esdl` file which holds your schema. You can change the schema by directly modifying this file followed by `edgedb migration create` and `edgedb migrate`.

Author: Added: https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-rust/commit/83ca0d1c340cef3ffdd0f3e8394871c49d00cb65

Now that you have the right dependencies and an EdgeDB instance, you can create a client.

# Using the client

Creating a new EdgeDB client can be done in a single line:

```rust
let client = edgedb_tokio::create_client().await?;
```

Under the hood, this will create a [Builder](crate::Builder), look for environmental variables and/or an `edgedb.toml` file and return an `Ok(Self)` if successful. This `Builder` can be used on its own instead of `create_client()` if you need a more customized setup.

# Queries with the client

Here are the simplified signatures of the client methods involving queries:

(Note: `R` here means a type that implements [`QueryResult`](https://docs.rs/edgedb-protocol/0.4.0/edgedb_protocol/trait.QueryResult.html))

```rust
fn query -> Result<Vec<R>, Error>
fn query_json -> Result<Json, Error>

fn query_single -> Result<Option<R>, Error>
fn query_single_json -> Result<Option<Json>>

fn query_required_single -> Result<R, Error>
fn query_required_single_json -> Result<Json, Error>
```

> Note that the two `_required_single` methods just call the `_single` methods with an `.ok_or_else()` inside so structurally there is nothing different about them.

Author: Okay, here's my go at that: https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-rust/commit/c8cdcba5bbecd47aa94dd68c478af1b49a7b1c29

    .await?;
```

# Sample queries

## When cardinality is guaranteed to be 1

Using the `.query()` method works fine for any cardinality, but returns a `Vec` of results. This query with a cardinality of 1 returns a `Result<Vec<String>>` which becomes a `Vec<String>` after the error is handled:

```rust
let query = "select 'Just a string'";
let query_res: Vec<String> = client.query(query, &()).await?;
```

But if you know that only a single result will be returned, using `.query_required_single()` or `.query_single()` will be more ergonomic:

```rust
let query = "select 'Just a string'";
let query_res: String = client.query_required_single(query, &()).await?;
let query_res_opt: Option<String> = client.query_single(query, &()).await?;
```

## Using the `Queryable` macro

The easiest way to unpack an EdgeDB query result is the built-in `Queryable` macro from the `edgedb-derive` crate. This turns queries directly into Rust types without having to match on a `Value` (more on the `Value` enum in [its own section](#the-value-enum)), cast to JSON, etc.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Deserialize, Queryable)]
pub struct QueryableAccount {
    pub username: String,
    pub id: Uuid,
}

> let query = "with account := 

Author: Okay, changed to this: https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-rust/commit/d486cc83d01a084991bfac961a6218d4a80757ab

        username := 'User1'
    }),
    select account {
      id,
      username
    };";
let wrong_order: Result<QueryableAccount, _> = client
    .query_required_single(query, &())
    .await;
assert!(
    format!("{wrong_order:?}")
    .contains(r#"WrongField { unexpected: "id", expected: "username" }"#);
);
```

You can use [cargo expand](https://github.com/dtolnay/cargo-expand) with the nightly compiler to see the code generated by the Queryable macro, but the minimal example repo also contains a somewhat cleaned up version of the generated code [here](https://github.com/Dhghomon/edgedb_rust_client_examples/blob/master/src/lib.rs#L12).

## Passing in arguments

Technically arguments can be passed in through any correctly formatted string, but this can be fragile and quickly gets awkward. Note the double `{{` curly braces as well as `' '` around the `movie_title` string to keep the EdgeDB compiler from seeing two separate `movie` and `title` tokens:

```rust
let movie_title = "Nice movie";
let release_year = 2023;
let query = format!(
    "with movie_title := '{movie_title}',
year := {release_year},
movie := (insert Movie {{
    title := movie_title,
    release_year := year

> }}),

Reviewer 2: Please don't do this. People will just copy-paste this example and not read the text.

Also we don't do this not because curly braces and quotes are ugly, but to prevent injections (google SQL Injection) and partially for performance.

If you want to demo how ugly it is, put a plaintext example, like this:
```
cli.query("with movie_title := 'Who\'s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?' ...")
```

And please mention that it's not just "you _should_ pass arguments as tuple" but you **have to**, this is the only valid way.

It's also probably a good idea to mention that we're working on `QueryArgs` derive for named arguments.

Author: The ugliness part is just a didactic memory trick so definitely not needed considering how important it is to keep users using arguments the proper way. To help with that I added a small example with arguments closer to the top so that readers will have something to copy and paste in right away. Then removing the format string part made the lower section on arguments way too short so moved the content on arguments in general inside the REPL down to that section. Here are the changes: https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-rust/commit/3a5b78af4fb210d196b66c98a392f257588f47b7

select movie {{
    title,
    release_year,
    id
}}");
```

Instead, you can pass in arguments as a tuple as the second argument in the client methods. This allows the query to be a directly typed single `&'static str` and the cast notation (`<str>`, `<int32>`) makes the types more clearly visible:

```rust
let arguments = ("Nice movie", 2023);
let query = "with 
movie_title := <str>$0,
year := <int32>$1,
movie := (insert Movie {
  title := movie_title,
  release_year := year

> })

Reviewer 2: What is the goal of using `with` everywhere? Here `Movie { title := $0, year := $1 }` give enough context for the variables to figure out which mean what. So adding with only makes it less readable I think.

Author: Okay, changed to that.

```rust
pub enum Value {
    Nothing,
    Uuid(Uuid),
    Str(String),
    Bytes(Vec<u8>),
    Int16(i16),
    Int32(i32),
    Int64(i64),
    Float32(f32),
    Float64(f64),
    BigInt(BigInt),
    // ... and so on
}
```

Most variants of the `Value` enum correspond to a Rust type from the standard library, while some are from the `edgedb-protocol` crate and will have to be constructed. For example, this query expecting a `bigint` will return an error as it receives a `20` (an `i32`) but EdgeDB is expecting a `bigint`:

```rust
let query = "select <bigint>$0";
let argument = 20;
let query_res: Result<Value, _> = client.query_required_single(query, &(argument,)).await;
assert!(format!("{query_res:?}").contains("expected std::int32"));
```

Instead, first construct a `BigInt` from the `i32` and pass that in as an argument:

```rust
use edgedb_protocol::model::BigInt;

let query = "select <bigint>$0";
let bigint_arg = BigInt::from(20);
let query_res: Result<Value, _> = client.query_required_single(query, &(bigint_arg,)).await;
assert_eq!(
    format!("{query_res:?}"),
    "Ok(BigInt(BigInt { negative: false, weight: 0, digits: [20] }))"
);
```

> ## Casting inside the EdgeDB compiler

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what this section adds. You should mention that type of the arguments must be provided in the query in the "arguments" section. I don't see a workflow where users would like to read until this section to find out that.

If you think users need some explanation about why type-casting works for variables and for other things, it should belong to EdgeQL docs not Rust docs.

EdgeDB requires arguments to have a cast in the same way that Rust requires a type declaration in function signatures. As such, arguments in queries are used as type specification for the EdgeDB compiler, not to cast from queries from the Rust side. Take this query as an example:

```rust
let query = "select <int32>$0";
```

This simply means "select an argument that must be an `int32`", not "take the received argument and cast it into an `int32`".

As such, this will return an error:

```rust
let query = "select <int32>$0";
let argument = 9i16; // Rust client will expect an int16
let query_res: Result<Value, _> = client.query_required_single(query, &(argument,)).await;
assert!(query_res
    .unwrap_err()
    .to_string()
    .contains("expected std::int16"));
```

> ## Using JSON

Reviewer 2: This section written as is makes it unclear of why JSON mode is needed at all. Basically it's needed to respond to the some JSON API request directly without re-serializing result. So unpacking usually isn't needed for most cases.

Author: Okay, added a note on JSON API requests plus an etc. at the end - sometimes people like the user on Discord last week just like the json methods for the convenience (was doing some bulk inserts)

EdgeDB can cast any type to JSON with `<json>` so just sticking that in front of a query is enough to return the same object as JSON. This result can be turned into a struct using `serde` and `serde_json`.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Deserialize)]
pub struct Account {
    pub username: String,
    pub id: Uuid,
}

let query = "with account := 
    (insert Account {
        username := <str>$0
    }),

>     select <json>account {

Reviewer 2: You don't need type cast to use `query_single_json`. Even more it will likely be slower as first to postgres's `jsonb` cast will be done (this is what EdgeDB's `json` is), and then that `jsonb` converted to string (because `*_json` queries return json as a string (this is some optimization, I have to recall why we do that, but I remember that the reason is important).

Author: Okay, casts are gone!

      username,
      id
    };";

// We know there will only be one result so use query_single_json;
// otherwise it will return a map of json
let json_res = client
    .query_single_json(query, &("SomeUserName",))
    .await?
    .unwrap();

let as_account: Account = serde_json::from_str(&json_res)?;
```

> ## Using JSON with the `edgedb(json)` attribute

Reviewer 2: Probably not for tutorial. Or show a usecase where `edgedb(json)` is better than returning object normally. In this example there is literally no difference.

Author: This one feels like trying to find a perfect alteranite example for edgedb(json) would just make it seem more important an attribute than it is, so opted to just remove it.

account A and saving it to account B. Performing these operations in an atomic
transaction ensures that the database remains in a consistent state, that is,
money is neither lost nor created if either of those two operations fails.
```

A transaction removing 10 cents from one customer's account and placing it in another's would look like this:

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Deserialize, Queryable)]
pub struct BankCustomer {
    pub name: String,
    pub bank_balance: i32,
}
// Customer1 has an account with 110 cents in it.
// Customer2 has an account with 90 cents in it.
// Customer1 is going to send 10 cents to Customer 2. This will be a transaction
// because we don't want the case to ever occur - even for a split second -
// where one account has sent money while the other has not received it yet.

// After the transaction is over, each customer should have 100 cents.

let query = "with customer := (
    update BankCustomer filter .name = <str>$0
    set { bank_balance -= 10 }
    ),
    select customer {
      name,
      bank_balance
    };";

cloned_client
    .transaction(|mut conn| async move {
        let _res_1: BankCustomer = conn.query_required_single(query, &(c1,)).await?;

>         let _res_2: BankCustomer = conn.query_required_single(query, &(&c2,)).await?;

Reviewer 2: You are subtracting from both accounts.

Also, this is a good example to actually check balance. Either by returning final balance from the first account and throwing exceptions or by doing "select" at the start.

I think select at the start is better because demonstrates logic inside the transaction and demonstrates why we have to retry user function fully instead of just retrying executed queries. And the fact that we retry transactions automatically have to be at least said prominently here or maybe demostrated with some side-effect function log message inside the transaction function.

Also `select customer` makes code more complex than is needed here. I think you can use [`execute`](https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-rust/pull/247), as it should be merged into the same release as this tutorial.

Author: Okay, gave this one a go here in addition to a short section on the new execute method and how to use it for those who are eager: https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-rust/commit/7fba9d71142aa21f8466bf6f50c85d9a7696274c

Not sure if that's the ideal transaction method yet, what do you think? It does a balance check beforehand and now uses .execute() but can't think of a way to demonstrate inside a short sample how retries get done automatically. Is there a good way to force a query to fail once and have it retry automatically inside a sample meant to be short and readable?

Also the setting a superuser was the best idea I could find for .execute() as a sample that returns an Ok(()) but doesn't make any huge changes like schema or configuration, which are disabled via the client by default anyway. I spent some time looking for a command that doesn't really make any changes or do anything consequential at all (like a ping) but couldn't find one. Maybe there's a more suitable example for the .execute() section that returns an Ok(())?

    })
    .await?;
```

> Note that atomic transactions can often be achieved with links and [backlinks](https://www.edgedb.com/docs/edgeql/paths#backlinks) instead of transaction operations, which is both more idiomatic to EdgeDB and easier to use.

Reviewer 2: With this example it's not. So this wording is a bit out of place. We can make a page with "tips and tricks for transactions", or put some examples of that into "performance/optimization guide" which we plan to do (ask @raddevon for details).

Reviewer: The only detail I have at this point regarding the performance and optimization guide is that there _aren't_ many details. 😅  The idea was brought up in our meeting on Wednesday. I know we want to move one recommendation from the main docs — to reverse the direction of a one-to-many relationship so that they can be changed from `multi` links to `single` links — into some kind of performance guide. Beyond that, I don't know much. I suspect I won't be able to devote a ton of energy to it until after the 3.0 release and maybe until after the Cloud release depending on what that demands from me.

Reviewer 2: This is not urgent too. We can probably add a tag and start collecting cases in the issue tracker.

Author: I did find your original comment on not always needing a transaction insightful so do want to keep it in for the benefit of others. I think this could work where the tip is moved to the top of the transaction section to ensure it doesn't look like it's insinuating that the transaction example should be done otherwise.

https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-rust/commit/7000332bce65d07fc1e78ddd9a77e464c2bb03de

Reviewer 3: I like this particular hint too, but honestly I had a long pause here reading and trying to understand the "advanced" note (without sample code!) before getting into the basic transaction example below. I'd vote for stashing this note to be added in a later/other page.

# EdgeDB Rust client tutorial

> # Getting started (project template repo)

Author: I'll bring in these suggestions to switch the wording though I think I'll end up turning this part into just a quick link to the repo instead of a separate section before the main "Getting started" part.

## Cargo

The minimum to add to your Cargo.toml to use the client is [edgedb-tokio](https://docs.rs/edgedb-tokio/latest/edgedb_tokio/):

    edgedb-tokio = "0.3.0"

The next most common dependency is [edgedb-protocol](https://docs.rs/edgedb-protocol/latest/edgedb_protocol/), which includes the EdgeDB types used for data modeling:

    edgedb-protocol = "0.4.0"

A third crate called [edgedb-derive](https://docs.rs/edgedb-derive/latest/edgedb_derive/) contains a `#[derive(Queryable)]` derive macro:

    edgedb-derive = "0.4.0"
    
The Rust client uses tokio so add this to Cargo.toml as well:

    tokio = { version = "1.27.0", features = ["macros", "rt-multi-thread"] }`

If you are avoiding async code and want to emulate a blocking client, you will still need to use tokio as a dependency but can bridge with async using [one of the methods](https://tokio.rs/tokio/topics/bridging) recommended by tokio. This won't require any added features:

    tokio = "1.27.0"

And then you can start a runtime upon which you can use the `.block_on()` method to block and wait for futures to resolve. e.g.:

```rust
let rt = tokio::runtime::Builder::new_current_thread()
    .enable_all()
    .build()?;

> ```

Author: Good idea, that fills the example out nicely:

https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-rust/commit/6a9161935472fd72260437d467ad4d3e90632d65

## Edgedb CLI

> The `edgedb` CLI initializes EdgeDB projects in the same way cargo does, except it does not create a new directory. So to start a project, use `cargo new (your crate name)` as usual, then go into the directory and type `edgedb project init`. The CLI will prompt you for the instance name and version of EdgeDB to use. It will look something like this:

Author: Yes. This is a bit of a hint to my past self as when I first gave EdgeDB Projects a try in March my Cargo habit just led me to assume that it would create a project in a new directory. That in and of itself wasn't a big deal but I next made a Cargo project in a new directory and then `edgedb project init`ed inside it which confused the EdgeDB CLI by the edgedb.toml I hadn't deleted in the parent directory.

    > Y
    Specify the name of EdgeDB instance to use with this project [default: my_db]:
    > my_db
    Checking EdgeDB versions...
    Specify the version of EdgeDB to use with this project [default: 2.12]:
    > 2.12
    ┌─────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────────┐
    │ Project directory   │ \\?\C:\rust\my_db               │
    │ Project config      │ \\?\C:\rust\my_db\edgedb.toml   │
    │ Schema dir (empty)  │ \\?\C:\rust\my_db\dbschema      │
    │ Installation method │ WSL                             │
    │ Version             │ 2.12+5454e58                    │
    │ Instance name       │ my_db                           │
    └─────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────────┘
    Version 2.12+5454e58 is already installed
    Initializing EdgeDB instance...
    [edgedb] CRITICAL 12273 2023-04-03T08:07:06.626 postgres: the database system is starting up
    [edgedb] CRITICAL 12295 2023-04-03T08:07:25.455 postgres: the database system is starting up
    Applying migrations...
    Everything is up to date. Revision initial
    Project initialized.
    To connect to my_db, run `edgedb`

Inside your cargo project you'll notice some new items:

> * edgedb.toml, which is used to mark the directory as an EdgeDB project. The file itself doesn't contain much (just the version of EdgeDB being used) but is used by the CLI to run commands without connection flags (e.g. `edgedb -I my_project migrate` becomes simply `edgedb migrate`). See more on edgedb.toml [here](https://www.edgedb.com/blog/introducing-edgedb-projects).

Author: Aw yeah, em dashes

The `()` unit type [implements QueryArgs](https://docs.rs/edgedb-protocol/latest/edgedb_protocol/query_arg/trait.QueryArgs.html#impl-QueryArgs-for-()) and is used when no arguments are present so `&()` is a pretty common sight when using the Rust client:

```rust
client.query("This just returns a string", &());
```

These methods take two generic parameters:

```rust
let query_res = client.query_required_single::<String, ()>
    ("select {'This just returns a string'}", &()).await?;
    // or
let query_res = client.query_required_single::<String, _>
    ("select {'This just returns a string'}", &()).await?;
```
    
Declaring the type up front tends to look neater than the turbofish syntax:

```rust
let query_res: String = client.query_required_single
    ("select {'This just returns a string'}", &()).await?;
```

# Sample queries

## When cardinality is guaranteed to be 1

Using the `.query()` method works fine in any case, but returns a Vec of results. In this case we return a `Result<Vec<String>>`:

```rust
let query = "select {'This just returns a string'}";
let query_res: Result<Vec<String>, Error> = client.query(query, &()).await;
```

> If you know that only a single result will be returned, using .query_required_single() or .query_single() will be more ergonomic:

Author: In this case it's because it returns a Vec<String> (like an array of strings) even if there is just one string inside, making you have to index at [0] (quick but not good Rust practice) or use .get(0) to safely pull it out which requires a bit of handling in case nothing is there at index 0. Also it's just a bit awkward to get a Vec when you know there's only one item being returned.

I changed the example a bit to show the post-handling signature (adding a ? in Rust automatically handles the error for you which is really cool).

```rust
let query = "select {'This just returns a string'}";
let query_res: Result<String, Error> = client.query_required_single(query, &()).await;
let query_res_opt: Result<Option<String>, Error> = client.query_single(query, &()).await;
```

## Passing in arguments

Technically arguments can be avoided by passing in a correctly formatted string, but this can be fragile and quickly gets awkward. Imagine that we want to select a tuple and pass in two arguments such that the EdgeDB compiler sees this:

```
select {( 'Hi there', <int32>10 )};
```

> Even in an example as simple as this, we need double `{{` curly braces as well as `' '` around the "Hello there" string to keep the EdgeDB compiler from seeing two separate `Hello` and `there` tokens:

Author: Yeah, it's one of those "Technically you can do this (but here's why you probably don't want to) type examples".

Could just replace it with a note saying "technically you can pass in anything as a String formatted in such a way that EdgeDB will recognize it, but..." and then get to showing how arguments work.

```rust
let message = "Hi there";
let num = 10;
let query = format!("select {{
    ('{message}', {num})
    }};");
```

> Instead of directly formatting a query, passing in arguments as a tuple allows the query to be a directly typed single &'static str and the cast notation (`<str>`, `<int32>`) makes the types more clearly visible:

Author: It's `&'static str`, but on second thought maybe "...allows you to simply type a string literal while the cast notation..." looks better. Won't need backticks then.

```rust
let query = "select {
    (<str>$0, <int32>$1)
    };";
let arguments = ("Hi there", 10);
let query_res: Value = client.query_required_single(query, &arguments).await?;
assert_eq!(
    format!("{query_res:?}"),
    r#"Tuple([Str("Hi there"), Int32(10)])"#
);
```

## Casting inside the EdgeDB compiler

EdgeDB requires arguments to have a cast in the same way that Rust requires a type declaration in a signature or when the compiler is unable to determine the type.

```
// Rust
fn takes_something(num) {} // Error: parameter needs a type
fn takes_something(num: i32) {} // Fine: Rust knows to expect an i32

// EdgeDB
select $0 // Error: EdgeDB needs to know what argument type to expect
select <int32>$0 // Fine: EdgeDB knows to expect an i32

> ```

Author: Okay, deleted.

> As such, arguments in queries are used as type inference for the EdgeDB compiler, not to cast from queries from the Rust side. Take this query as an example:

Author: Ah yes, should say 'type specification'. Will change to that.

    "Ok(BigInt(BigInt { negative: false, weight: 0, digits: [20] }))"
);
```

Variants only needing standard library types to construct:

```rust
    Nothing,
    Str(String),
    Int16(i16),
    Int32(i32),
    Int64(i64),
    Float32(f32),
    Float64(f64),
    Bool(bool),
    Json(Json), // Holds a String
    Enum(EnumValue), // Holds a str
```

Variants holding types from the edgedb-protocol:

```rust
    Datetime(Datetime),
    LocalDatetime(LocalDatetime),
    LocalDate(LocalDate),
    LocalTime(LocalTime),
    Duration(Duration),
    RelativeDuration(RelativeDuration),
    DateDuration(DateDuration),
    BigInt(BigInt),
    ConfigMemory(ConfigMemory),
    Decimal(Decimal),
```

Variants using a different external crate to construct:

```rust
    Uuid(Uuid), // from https://docs.rs/uuid/latest/uuid/
    Bytes(Bytes), // from https://docs.rs/bytes/latest/bytes/
```

Variants holding other Values:

```rust
    Set(Vec<Value>),
    Object { shape: ObjectShape, fields: Vec<Option<Value>> },
    SparseObject(SparseObject),
    Tuple(Vec<Value>),
    NamedTuple { shape: NamedTupleShape, fields: Vec<Value> },
    Array(Vec<Value>),
    Range(Range<Box<Value>>),
```

> ## Alternatives to working with Value

Author: I'm thinking of rephrasing this without using the word alternative. Going over the Value enum shows every type that can be returned from EdgeDB to the client which is a great introduction to the protocol, but afterwards you don't want to spend your time matching on its variants every time and Queryable lets you bypass all of this. It's more like "going beyond the Value enum" or something like that.

> ## Alternatives to working with Value

Reviewer 2: I still think you shouldn't care about `Value` type in the tutorial at all. It's currently a way to use types are we didn't implement yet. But other than that it's mostly useful for repl not for apps.

There are a lot of alternatives to Value when dealing with the output from EdgeDB on the Rust side.

> ### Using json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using JSON
```

Using json is pretty comfortable for Rust user thanks to serde and serde_json. EdgeDB can cast any type to json with `<json>` so just sticking that in front of a query is enough to return the same object as json:

```rust
let query = "select <json>(
    insert Account {
    username := <str>$0
    }) {
    username, 
    id
    };";

// We know there will only be one result so use query_single_json;
// otherwise it will return a map of json
let json_res = client
    .query_single_json(query, &("SomeUserName",))
    .await?
    .unwrap();
```

You can turn this into a serde_json::Value and access using square brackets:

```rust
let as_value: serde_json::Value = serde_json::from_str(&json_res)?;
println!(
    "Username is {},\nId is {}.\n",
    as_value["username"], as_value["id"]
);
```

> But deserializing into a Rust type is much more common (and rigorous). If you have an Account struct that implements Deserialize, you can use serde_json to deserialize the result into an Account.

Author: Basically this: https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=e83485694a23b175e85df43f0fe0d237 (Hit run to see the result)

Whereas if you deserialize into a struct you wouldn't be able to try to access a parameter that doesn't exist (program wouldn't compile).

pub struct Account {
    pub username: String,
    pub id: Uuid,
}

let as_account: Account = serde_json::from_str(&json_res)?;
```

### Using the Queryable macro

The edgedb-derive crate has a built-in Queryable macro that lets us just query without having to cast to json. Same query as before:

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Deserialize, Queryable)]
pub struct QueryableAccount {
    pub username: String,
    pub id: Uuid,
}
let query = "select (
    insert Account {
    username := <str>$0
    }) {
    username, 
    id
    };";
let as_queryable_account: QueryableAccount = client
    .query_required_single(query, &("SomeUserName",))
    .await?;
```

Note: field order (in other words, the "shape" of the query) matters when using the Queryable macro. In the example before, a query is done in the order `id, username` instead of `username, id` as defined in the struct:

```rust
let query = "select (
    insert Account {
    username := <str>$0
    }) {
    id, 
    username
    };";
let cannot_make_into_queryable_account: Result<QueryableAccount, _> =
    client.query_required_single(query, &("SomeUserName",)).await;
assert!(
    format!("{cannot_make_into_queryable_account:?}")

>     .contains(r#"error: Some(WrongField { unexpected: "id", expected: "username" })"#);

Author: Yes, Display output from .unwrap_err() just shows `DescriptorMismatch`.

Re: the flow - this is one of the first hiccups I had with the macro and having this nota bene up front would have been helpful. (Want to avoid any new users concluding that the macro doesn't work and moving on to less slick methods to deserialize when all they have to do is match the query shape to the Rust struct)

);
```

### Using json with the edgedb(json) attribute

Adding the edgedb(json) attribute on top of Queryable allows unpacking a struct from json returned from EdgeDB in a single call:

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Deserialize, Queryable)]
#[edgedb(json)]
pub struct JsonQueryableAccount {
    pub username: String,
    pub id: Uuid,
}

let json_queryable_accounts: Vec<JsonQueryableAccount> = client
    .query("select <json>Account { username, id }", &())
    .await
    .unwrap();
```

> This attribute can also be used on an inner struct value that implements Queryable. Here, some random json is turned into a HashMap<String, String>:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This attribute can also be used on an inner struct value that implements `Queryable`. Here, some random JSON is turned into a `HashMap<String, String>`:
```

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Deserialize, Queryable)]
pub struct InnerJsonQueryableAccount {
    pub username: String,
    pub id: Uuid,
    #[edgedb(json)]
    pub some_json: HashMap<String, String>,
}

let query = r#" with j := <json>(
    nice_user := "yes",
    bad_user := "no"
)
select Account {
    username,
    id,
    some_json := j
    };"#;
let query_res: Vec<InnerJsonQueryableAccount> = client.query(query, &()).await.unwrap();
``` 

## Transactions

The client also has a .transaction() method that allows atomic [transactions](https://www.edgedb.com/docs/edgeql/transactions). Wikipedia has a good example of a transaction and why it would be best done atomically:

```
An example of an atomic transaction is a monetary transfer from bank account A 
to account B. It consists of two operations, withdrawing the money from account A 
and saving it to account B. Performing these operations in an atomic transaction 
ensures that the database remains in a consistent state, that is, money is 
neither lost nor created if either of those two operations fails.
```

> A transaction removing 10 cents from one customer's account and placing it in the other's account would look as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A transaction removing 10 cents from one customer's account and placing it in another's would look like this:
```

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Deserialize, Queryable)]
#[edgedb(json)]
pub struct BankCustomer {
    pub name: String,
    pub bank_balance: i32,
}
    // Transactions
    // Customer1 has an account with 110 cents in it.
    // Customer2 has an account with 90 cents in it.
    // Customer1 is going to send 10 cents to Customer 2. This will be a transaction 
    // because we don't want the case to ever occur - even for a split second -  
    // where one account has sent money while the other has not received it yet.

    // After the transaction is over, each customer should have 100 cents.

    let customers_after_transaction = client.transaction(|mut conn| async move {
        let res_1 = conn.query_required_single_json
        ("select(update BankCustomer filter .name = <str>$0 set 
        { bank_balance := .bank_balance - 10 }){name, bank_balance};", &("Customer1",)).await?;
        let res_2 = conn.query_required_single_json
        ("select(update BankCustomer filter .name = <str>$0 set
        { bank_balance := .bank_balance + 10 }){name, bank_balance};", &("Customer2",)).await?;

>         Ok(vec![res_1, res_2])

Author: True, I use res_1 and res_2 in the repo to return and print the output but I guess here we can just remove it.

    }).await?;
```

> ## Links can work instead of transactions

Reviewer: I think I agree with @tailhook, but I'd love to see this make it to the general documentation. Maybe at https://www.edgedb.com/docs/edgeql/transactions ? If so, maybe it would be good to also include your bank transaction example (generalized so that it's not about Rust) first on that page as a non-link example of a transaction.

> ## Links can work instead of transactions

Author: I think I'll just shrink this to a general comment about how links are often the more idiomatic (and easier) way to handle an action that might seem like a transaction at first. This goes back to the discussion where Paul mentioned a link instead of a transaction that I found helpful so I do want to keep it in as a tip.

And yeah, add something to the general documentation too I think. I'll make a PR for that.

> ## Links can work instead of transactions

Author: Okay, I've cut that part at the end to the bare minimum to just let the readers do their own exploration from there. Will bring it back to life in the general transaction documentation in a similar form.

Note that atomic transactions can often be achieved with links instead of transaction operations, which is both more idiomatic to EdgeDB and easier to use.

> For example, a wedding ceremony can in theory be seen as an atomic operation as it involves two instantaneous changes in state (from single to married) and should not have a state in between where Person A is married to Person B but Person B is still not yet married to Person A. However, this can be easily accomplished through links instead. One method to accomplish this might be to insert a `WeddingCertificate` with links to two `Person` objects each holding a government id number, with the `Person` type linking to a `WeddingCertificate` containing its government id number to pull up marriage status, the spouse's Person object, and so on.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need this block in Rust tutorial. We can have it in some "transactions guide" in the normal EdgeDB docs and link there if you wish.
